these also are Proverbs of Solomon which
the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied
it is the glory of God to conceal a
matter but the glory of kings is to
search out a matter as the heavens for
height and the earth for depth so the
heart of Kings is unsearchable take away
the dross from silver and it will go to
the silversmith for jewelry take away
the wicked from before the King and his
throne will be established in
righteousness do not exalt yourself in
the presence of the king and do not
stand in the place of the great for it
is better that he say to you come up
here then that you should be put lower
in the presence of the Prince whom your
eyes have seen do not go hastily to
court for what will you do in the end
when your neighbor has put you to shame
debate your case with your neighbor and
do not disclose the secret to another
lest he who hears it
expose your shame and your reputation be
ruined a word fitly spoken is like
apples of gold in settings of silver
like an earring of gold and an ornament
of fine gold is a wise rebuke to an
obedient ear like the cold of snow in
time of harvest is a faithful messenger
to those who send him for he refreshes
the soul of his masters whoever falsely
boasts of giving is like clouds and wind
without rain
by long forbearance a ruler is persuaded
and a gentle tongue breaks a bone have
you found honey eat only as much as you
need lest you be filled with it and
vomit seldom set foot in your neighbor's
house lest he become wary of you and
hate you
a man who bears false witness against
his neighbor is like a club a sword and
a sharp arrow confidence in an
unfaithful man in time of trouble is
like a bad tooth and a foot out of joint
like one who takes away a garment in
cold weather and like vinegar on soda is
one who sings songs to a heavy heart if
your enemy is hungry give him bread to
eat and if he is thirsty give him water
to drink for so you will heap coals of
fire on his head and the Lord will
reward you
the north wind brings forth rain and a
backbiting tongue an angry countenance
it is better to dwell in a corner of a
housetop than in a house shared with a
contentious woman as cold water to a
weary soul so is good news from a far
country a righteous man who falters
before the wicked is like a murky spring
and a polluted well it is not good to
eat much honey
so to seek one's own glory is not glory
whoever has no rule over his own spirit
is like a city broken down without walls
[Music]